# Seasonal hypoxia at a coastal study site in the Baltic Sea serves as a model for predicting future climate driven deoxygenation and sulfide expansion in bottom waters
Abstract
Rising temperatures and organic fluxes to the seafloor contribute to oxygen depletion in coastal waters but benthic feedbacks remain unclear. We examined effects of deoxygenation on benthic processes at a seasonally hypoxic coastal site (SW Baltic Sea) for 15-months. We measured and modeled benthic metabolic rates, performed sequential Fe-extractions, porewater and metagenome/-transcriptome analyses for sediments. Well ventilated waters and an algal bloom promoted upregulation of complex organic substrate breakdown, fermentation, terminal respiration and microbial competition in February/March sediments. After anoxic bottom waters and during reoxygenation in October, the benthic microbial community appeared to undergo anabolic reprogramming, redox balancing and carbon re-cycling accompanied by high sulfate reduction rates (sulfide production). Historically, dissolved Fe persisted much of the year in surface sediments. Recently though, exhaustion of Fe-(oxyhydr)oxides by October and shallowing of the sulfide horizon reflect a self-reinforcing feedback loop towards a system where toxic hydrogen sulfide is emitted to the bottom waters. Fe-oxide formation appears limited and Fe is likely “lost” to pyrite precipitation and burial. With Fe-oxides temporarily exhausted, risk of benthic sulfide release increases during phases of bottom water hypoxia. Upwelling of deep waters then poses a threat to marine life entailing environmental and socio-economic consequences.

### For the code please look at the repo's Wiki pages
